Term Project (Part1 and Part2) - Description
In this project, you are expected to construct a network that consists of 5 nodes, which are connected to each other. This project will be divided into two parts. The first part will be a partial network discovery step (you will find link costs, you know IP addresses, the topology, and  existing nodes) by implementing a simple User Datagram Protocol (UDP) in addition to one experiment, and in the second part, the specified network will use your own  "reliable and multi-homed" protocol to transmit a large file. In the first part of this project, assume that you will send your own messages among the nodes, however, in the second part of the project we will send a large file such that we want to transmit intact from source to destination.   

A. Topology 
In this assignment, you are going to build and test virtual networks on the GENI platform (https://portal.geni.net/). The protocols will be tested on the below specific topology consisting of five (5) hosts. 

The network has the below-specified topology. There are 5 hosts. While you are creating your slices, please use an XML file ("Save as" to download_topology.xml). Please, look at the "GENI tutorials to create a slice with using an XML file". In this XML file, we created the nodes with manually  IP addresses. Thus, everybody works on the same topology, with the same interface IP addresses, and with the same configuration. 



Initial Configurations:
After the reserving process of the topology by using the GENI platform is completed, in order to accomplish the topology creation, you need some initial configurations: (For this purpose) please, run the linked shell scripts "configureR1.sh" and "configureR2.sh" on only the node "r1" and "r2" by connecting the corresponding nodes.

B. Part1

In the first part of this project, nodes employ the User Datagram Protocol (UDP)-based socket application.  

1. Specifications
You are expected to develop a UDP socket application. 
 At each of the nodes, only one script should run. Each node should have a client/server application. Each node should receive and send messages.
You can use any programming language to implement your code, as soon as you explain the usage of it. 
All nodes will implement a client/server application that sends and receives multiple messages at the same time. 
Each node should handle multiple requests. 
Our aim is to find the link costs by considering the RTT values between each hop (node). 
While estimating the RTT values you should collect and average the multiple measurements. Therefore, assume that you send 1000 discovery messages and find the RTT values by averaging them.   
The scripts for each node should be executed once only, and until they finish their messaging between each other to discover the costs of the links, the scripts should run. After terminating the messaging, the scripts on the nodes (r1, r2, and r3) should save the costs of the links between its neighbors to an output file named (link_costs.txt) (can be separated documents). Each of the nodes (r1, r2, and r3) should find and save the link costs values between the neighbors. You can choose and implement one of the following scenarios or you can propose new scenario: The costs of the links (s-r1, r1-r2, r1-d) will be estimated and saved by r1,  the costs of the links (s-r3, r2-r3, r3-d) will be estimated and saved by r3, and finally, the costs of the links (s-r2, r2-d) will be estimated and saved by r2; or the other scenario: the costs of the links (s-r1, r1-d) will be estimated and saved by r1,  the costs of the links (s-r3, r3-d) will be estimated and saved by r3, and finally, the costs of the links (s-r2,r1-r2, r2-r3, r2-d) will be estimated and saved by r2. Each node has to be able to send and receive messages at the same time (multiple requests) from its neighbors depending on these scenarios.  
You will use an application-level routing logic for the nodes.
The messaging approach is up to your design, as much as you provide the specs above (Each node has to be able to send and receive messages at the same time (multiple requests) from its neighbors depending on these scenarios.). For this purpose, as different examples, you can choose the node "s" as an initiator of the messages or other nodes can be chosen. For example, this node starts to send some messages and a copy of the messages over each of the available links, then you will store and send these packages hop-by-hop to determine the RTT values of each link at the same time. Each of the nodes (r1, r2, and  r3) should calculate the link costs for each neighbor at the same time by obeying the specifications above. Note that, any node should not wait for others to finish its 1000 messages. The messages should be directly stored and send when it is received. As another messaging scenario without waiting for an initiator, you can run firstly the script in r2 and then the others (r1, r3, d, and s) respectively, each scripts then will send and receive messages after they start to run. These are the possible scenarios you can use. However, you should consider the above specifications about the execution of the scripts which they should run only once, and handle multiple requests at the same time. Any other implementation approach or scenario obeying the rules is up to your design and acceptable. You should explain all the details in your reports.   
After finding the shortest-path, you will implement and modify your scripts in addition to a routing logic based on this shortest path for an experiment. The node s, r1,r2,r3, and d should have a routing logic implemented at the application layer. You can create a file including the routing table of each node locally so that you can use this routing table in order to route your data or control packets. 
Your codes are expected to include the necessary comments about the functionality of the code segments besides the README file. You are expected to use netem/tc Linux commands for the link configuration. This is a part of this assignment. You will learn the usage and use it to characterize links as specified below. Please, being aware of how to do such a configuration if you configure more than one parameter by using this command-line tool is important.
2. Link Costs
You are expected to find the costs of all links with round-trip time (RTT) as the cost metric. You are expected to find the RTT values of each link by sending some discovery messages multiple times (such as 1000 messages) and then take their average to calculate RTTs for each link. The approach for the transmission of discovery messages is specified above. 

3. Finding the Shortest Path using the Dijkstra Algorithm
After calculating the costs of all links, you can find the shortest path from the source node "s" to the destination node "d". You will find the shortest path based on the Dijkstra Algorithm. You are expected to create a table that shows all available paths from one node to another in addition to their costs and using this table you can find the shortest path. For the algorithm, the initial node will be "s". You should find the shortest path between the node "s" and "d". In your reports, you should present this table and all the iterations of your Dijkstra algorithm in this topology. In this part of the term project, you are expected to use the Dijkstra algorithm without using any implementation. You will make these calculations manually to find the shortest path, and present them in your reports. Therefore, the table and the algorithm's steps, and explanations are enough for this part.    

4. Experiment
You are expected to plot the following figure:
Plot a figure that provides the relation of network emulation delay and the end-to-end delay with a 95% confidence interval for each of the different communication. We will try to see how end-end delay (form s to d) will change in this network. You are expected to send messages by obeying to the shortest path that you have already found.  

For delay, use "normal distribution" as it is defined already.

Experiment 1: 20ms+-5ms
Experiment 2: 40ms+-5ms
Experiment 3: 50ms+-5ms
For the usage of 'tc' command: (All of these configurations should be applied to all links of the following three nodes s, r3 and d.)

*** Link Characterization

You should characterize the links based on the following link configuration using emulation delay. Apply, all these links before starting the next step. 

http://lartc.org/manpages/tc.txt
https://wiki.linuxfoundation.org/networking/netem

*** While calculating the end-to-end delay you can use the following manner (optional you can also use a different approach):

There should be a client program that sends a packet from node s to d.
There should be a server program on node d that receives a packet, and measure the end-to-end delay and it can send back the control feedback (not an obligation) (e.g., ACK or NACK if it is possible ).
You need the synchronization of the nodes, you can use NTP etc. for this part, This is also the part of your homework. 
4.1. Routing Logic Implementation for the Experiment
You are expected to implement an application-level routing logic. You can keep the routing information in a file, and update it for any requirement. The routing information may be different for the link-cost discovery and the experiment. Therefore, you are expected to provide the routing information which should be proper to the specification in your assignment submission. In other words, put your scripts into different folders: a folder called "discoveryScripts", and the other folder "experimentScripts".  

Up to this point, while you are sending some messages between the nodes, you find the costs of all links and calculate the shortest-path of your topology where the starting point is your source node "s", and the final node is the destination node "d". Now, you will conduct some experiments using the found shortest-path of this topology. For this purpose, you will send your messages only over the shortest path. For this experiment, you can write different scripts and modify your client/server scripts and routing information to send a list of messages from the node "s" to the destination point "d". Please put your scripts for discovery and the scripts for this experiment to your submission folder separately, if they are different. If you can handle using the same script you can inform in your reports and you can use the same scripts. 

5. Reporting
Use LaTeX to write the report. It should not be less than 4 and more than 6 pages. Please use the IEEE Conference LaTeX template.
The report must consist of your design and implementation approach, your methodology, motivation and your experimental results with their explanations and your comments to them. Explain in detail how your source, router implementations, and destination implementation handle UDP, and multiple links at the same time, your approach to finding the costs of all links, your table displaying the nodes and their costs, your calculations for Dijkstra Algorithm, your end-to-end delay calculations, differences between end-to-end delay and RTT calculations, your routing implementations, modifications, etc.  
Plot emulated delay versus end-to-end delay graph. Your comments about the change in the graph will also be graded. (What is the cause of the delay, what was expected, what can be changed, etc.)
Note that for each test, you have to execute your code many times and take the mean of your results before calculating end-to-end delay.
You also have to provide the code, and “how to run” within a README file. At the top of the README file, you should write ID, name, and surname of both group members as commented out. ReadMe File should also include all configuration commands step by step, how to synchronize the nodes, how to apply the tc/netem commands etc.. Please explain all of your steps you follow to execute your scripts for each experiment in READme file instead of inside of your report. 
 Rules (Tentative: In the evaluation process, these points may change)

The graph and the description will be 10 points.
Legend, axis labels, captions and units missing: -2 points
The description is not specific or not clear enough : -3 points
Description has wrong conclusions or missing key points: -5 points
Report and ReadMe File will be 40 points.
LaTeX: 5 points
Proper end-to-end delay for the experiment 5 points
Used correct parameters for emulation delay: 5 points
ReadMe File: 5 points
Discussions: 20 points
The code will be 50 points.
Code not working/missing protocols/software engineering principles are not followed: -20 points
Not obeying specifications such as (Routing, single scripts running on each node, etc.) not followed -20 points
Comments on the function of code segments missing -10 points
6. Deadline

The deadline is the 22nd of November 2019 at 23:55.

7. Submission

Use ODTUCLASS to submit the TP_Part1. There will be two submission steps: one of them is the submission of your implementation files and the other one is your report submission. The first step will be performed under the TP_Part1 Implementation and the other one will be under the TP-1 Report Assignment. Thus,

**** Put your scripts into different folders for the discovery part and the experiment part: a folder called "discoveryScripts", and the other folder "experimentScripts"

**** Submit your codes, latex files, and the README file on ODTUCLASS using the TP-1 Implementation Assignment (TP-1 Implementation Submission) as a single file named as TP_Part1_##.tar.gz. Then,

**** Submit your report to "TP-1 Report Submission" as TP_Part1_##.pdf.

      Do not forget the replace ## with your group number.

This assignment is a Turnitin assignment. According to METU regulations, we will tolerate up to 20% of similarity results.

If your result is bigger than 20%, your assignment will be evaluated as zero.

ONLY ONE GROUP MEMBER SHOULD SUBMIT THE HOMEWORK.

8. Extra Comments

* While plotting the figures, MatLab (Octave, Gnuplot) will ease your job if you can set up the output accordingly.

* Since this is a group homework, the coding part will be the same for the members of each group. Sharing the workload is OK, but it is not allowed to separate the coding part & the plotting part completely. 

* In the case of cheating, the cheating policy of our department will be strictly followed.

C. PART2
In this homework, you are expected to implement a UDP-based "Reliable Data Transfer" (RDT) protocol of your own (not same as RDT 3.0, etc. in the textbook and literature) that supports pipelining and multi-homing. You are also expected to modify your routing implementations based on the requirements of the file transmission. Note that your protocol should be implemented by considering your own approach and design. You will concentrate on the above topology in part A which each node has disjoint paths. The source will be the host s, and the destination will be the host d. 

1. Specifications
You can use any programming language to implement your code, as soon as you explain the usage of it. 
All nodes should handle the links in a reliable fashion.
Assume that a sender and receiver as an application layer implementation on the node "s" and the node "d" are running.
Your source node "s" will send this large file (exactly 5 MBytes) to the destination node "d".
The file transmission is performed for two experiments: The source node will send the specified file to the destination node by using two different paths by conducting two different experiments:
The first path will be the shortest one based on the Dijkstra Algorithm that you found in the first part, and the second one will use the other available links "at the same time". These two different transmissions should be handled by using the same script. You can give the number of experiments as a parameter to your scripts and run them for two experiments. 
For Experiment 1, your hosts (nodes) should route each of the packet based on the shortest path. This means that your file transmission will be over the shortest-path from the source node (s) to the destination node (d). The naming convention for the file can be for this transmission like input1 on the node "s" and output1 on the node "d".  
In Experiment 2, the source node exploits the remaining available links of (two) for a copy of this input file. The naming convention for the file can be like input2 on the node "s" and output2 on the node "d" for this transmission.
Exploit disjoint links between the source and destination. We will use the advantage of two links while transferring the file, exploiting these multiple paths will allow us to transfer the file faster. This part will provide us a multi-homed protocol that you are expected to implement.
Assume that the shortest path is s-->r3-->d for experiment 1, and, then the second file transmission (for experiment 2) routing information should be like the following: (Use these paths at the same time) for the first path: s --> r1 -->d and the second path s-->r2-->d, and for response messages also follow the inverse of these paths. The links between the r1 and r2; r2 and r3 will not be used.
The network may be faced with one type of failure which is link failure. One of the links between the source node "s" and two other nodes (r1 and r2) can be down. Your reliable and multi-homed implementation should be aware of the links and update the routing and modifying the reliable transmission over the available link. This part will be applied only for the second experiment (Experiment 2). 
Please write generic code since the network topology can be changed while evaluating your scripts: the links can be down. To down of a link: 
ip link set dev <interface> down
For two experiments:
The files will be protected with a checksum in the assessment. In other words, the input file at the source side, and the transmitted file at the destination side should be exactly the same. 
You will implement and develop your own RDT protocol on top UDP. Therefore, you will use your own reliable protocol to send a large file from s to d. Then, the communications will be based on your RDT protocol.  
Develop your reliable transport protocol that supports multi-homing by using UDP sockets. 
Develop a packet-based protocol.
Design your packet structure that will go into the UDP payload. The maximum packet sizes of your RDT protocol (header + payload) can be at most 1000 bytes.
 Here, your codes will be graded based on only the above topology. 
Only one script will run in each host
 

2. Experimental Results
  >>> You are expected to plot the following figure for two experiments above by using your own reliable protocols for each experiment.

x-axis: packet loss percentage (5%, 15%, 38%), y-axis: file transfer time with 95% confidence intervals. Keep the delay the same as 3 ms. Packet loss will be applied for all links. Notice that initial configurations should also be applied explained below. In this figure, the results of your RDT protocol should be represented as a line chart or bar graph. You will present your results by considering all the experiments.  (All of these configurations should be applied to all links of  all the nodes in the topology.)
tc qdisc change dev [INTERFACE] root netem loss 5% delay 3ms 
tc qdisc change dev [INTERFACE] root netem loss 15% delay 3ms 
tc qdisc change dev [INTERFACE] root netem loss 38% delay 3ms 
Notice that, for plotting the confidence interval you will have to repeat each experiment multiple times, say n. The margin of error less must be than 2.5%.  The z-score is 1.96 for 95% confidence. We expect that the standard error (deviation) will become smaller as you increase n. You will have to compute the value of n in your experiments based on the standard error you achieve.

3. Reports
Use latex (you will use the same template) to write the report. It should not be less than 6 pages and more than 8-9 pages.
Please write your problem &  solution, the methodology to overview of your codes, which mechanisms use to provide reliability,  your scripts, and your approaches. In your reports try to analyze and demonstrate your results. Differences between the first and second submissions type, and put some screenshots to show the multihoming part.
You are expected to discuss and compare the file transmission time durations, the implementation details of the first and the second submission type. 
In your reports, you should explain all of the developments and implementations, strategies, approaches, their reasons for your own protocol.  For instance: How do you provide multi-homing, pipelining ( if you use go-back-n, or selective repeat or your method, etc. Explain them), which mechanisms you use to implement RDT(checksum, re-transmission, ACK/NACK mechanism, sequence number, buffering, etc.) and which of such mechanisms you use to handle the loss, and how it affects your implementation.
Any design issue or algorithm selection is based on your decisions as long as it provides the transmission of a large file between two hosts in a reliable and pipelining multi-homed approach. It is important that you should explain your solutions to the problems clearly and explicitly. You should share your related code segments (for multihoming handler and pipelining) and explain them in your report.
Please also be sure that you are expected to make a read me file. For its content refer to the assignment text. Your configurations step by step, synchronization of the nodes, your first IP tables, all of the tc/netem usages, etc. In addition to your how to execute your scripts for each experiment and for each step.
Please put your coding comments into all of your scripts. All of them should be explained the reasons for the usage.
After obtaining the results and plotting these figures; report the figures and write your comments about the figures. You are expected to write at least one paragraph per figure including your technical discussions. Ensure that the figures are self-explanatory: labels, captions, and units are clearly stated in the figures. Use the paragraph to draw the attention to the most significant points of the figure, give specifics but do not repeat details. Ensure image clarity. Use legends.
You also have to provide the code, and “how to run” within a README file. At the top of the README file, you should write ID, name, and surname of both group members as commented out. ReadMe File should also include all configuration commands step by step (from time synchronization to using routing command).  For the network configuration part show your IP tables, your used commands to make the configuration and other settings.  Please explain all of the steps you follow to execute your scripts for each experiment.

4. Submission
Use ODTUCLASS to submit the homework. There will be two submission steps: one of them is the submission of your implementation files and the other one is your report submission. The first step will be performed under this Assignment and the other one will be under the Turnitin Assignment. Thus,

**** Submit your codes, latex files, and README file to this assignment (TP-2 Implementation Submission) as a single file named as TP_part2_##.tar.gz. Then,

**** Submit your report to "TP-2 Report Submission" as Tp_part2_##.pdf.

      Do not forget the replace ## with your group number.

This assignment is a Turnitin assignment. According to METU regulations, we will tolerate up to 20% of similarity results.

If your result is bigger than 20%, your assignment will be evaluated as zero.

ONLY ONE GROUP MEMBER SHOULD SUBMIT THE HOMEWORK.

Your source codes will be checked with the codes with different resources in terms of academic dishonesty.

5. Suggestions
* While plotting the figures, MatLab, Octave or Gnuplot will ease your job if you can set up the output accordingly.

* Each group member may get different grades. Sharing the workload is OK, but do not separate the coding part & the reporting part completely. Express clearly in the document who has done what!

* You can use any programming language.

* You can use any idea or approach unless it is specified in this document. 

6. Evaluation (TENTATIVELY)
1- Reliable Data Transfer protocol implementation with a proper checksum for the above topology for Experiment 1 (15) points. In detail, (15) points for your RDT protocol with a proper checksum for the above topology for Experiment 2. In other words, your input file should be transmitted to the destination as it is. If your code is successful regarding multi-homing and pipelining, you will get 10,10 points respectively. These points also include the explanation of your mechanisms, design, etc. in your reports.

2- The figure and the associated paragraph will deserve  10 points. 

2.1 Legend, axis labels, caption and units missing: -2 points
2.2 Paragraph is not specific or repeats details: -4 points
2.3 The paragraph derives wrong conclusions or not explanatory reflecting key learning points -4 points

Therefore, there is one figure for two experiments:  10 points.

4. Link Characterization, link failure handler, and explanation with screenshots to present the down of a link and the transmission on one of the other links: 5 points.

5- Discussion about multi-homing implementation in detail explicitly 10 points.

6.- Latex and clear ReadMe File 10 points. 

7. Deadline

The deadline is the 27th of December 2019 at 23:55. 